# How to Invest money in 5 Steps 

The investing information provided on this page is for
educational purposes only. NerdWallet, Inc. does not offer
advisory or brokerage services, nor does it recommend or advise
investors to buy or sell particular stocks, securities or other
investments.

## Nerdy takeaways
  * How you invest money is personal and unique to your risk
 tolerance and investment timeline.
  * First, open an investment account based on whether you are
 investing for retirement, education, a kid or another goal.
  * Select investments—such as stocks, bonds, funds or real
 estate—that match your risk tolerance.
  * Minimize your exposure to risk by spreading your money
 across a range of asset classes.

Investing money in the stock market is one of the main ways to
build wealth and save for long-term goals such as retirement.
But figuring out the best strategy to invest that money can
feel daunting. That doesn't need to be the case, though — there
are several straightforward, beginner-friendly ways to invest.

## Investing money is personal

Everyone has a unique financial situation. The best way to
invest depends on your personal preferences and financial
circumstances.

Here's a five-step process that can help you figure out how to
invest your money right now:
 1. Identify your financial goal and when you want to
 achieve that goal.
 2. Decide if you wish to manage your money yourself or
 work with a service that does it for you.
 3. Pick the type of investment account you'll use.
 4. Open an account.
 5. Choose your investments.

Here’s how to put your cash to work right away.

## How to invest money

### 1. Give your money a goal

Figuring out how to invest money starts with determining your
investing goals, when you need or want to achieve them and your
comfort level with risk for each goal.
  * Long-term goals: These goals are at least five years away.
 One common goal is retirement, but you may also have
 others: Do you want a down payment on a house or college
 tuition? To purchase your dream vacation home or go on an
 anniversary trip in 10 years? If so, check out our guide
 to long-term investments.

  * Short-term goals: These goals are less than five years
 away. They could be next summer's vacation, a house you
 want to buy next year, an emergency fund or your holiday
 piggy bank. Money for short-term goals generally shouldn't
 be invested at all. If you need the money you're saving in
 under five years, check out our guide to investing
 money for short-term goals.

In this article, we'll focus largely on investing for long-term
goals and touch on how to invest without a specific goal in
mind. After all, growing your money is a fine goal by itself.
If you've come into a windfall, or are simply unsure of the
right amount to get started, learn more about your options:

### 2. Decide how much help you want

Once you know your goals, you can dive into the specifics of
how to invest (from picking the type of account to the best
place to open an account to choosing investment vehicles). But
if the DIY route doesn't sound like it'll be your cup of tea,
no worries.

Many savers prefer having someone invest their money for them.
While that used to be a pricey proposition, nowadays, it may be
surprisingly affordable to hire professional help thanks to the
advent of automated portfolio management services, a.k.a.
robo-advisors.

These online advisors use computer algorithms and advanced
software to build and manage a client’s investment
portfolio, offering everything from automatic rebalancing to
tax optimization and even access to human help when you need
it.

If you'd rather do it yourself, continue reading — we'll take
you through the steps.

### 3. Pick an investment account

You'll need an investment account to buy most investments,
including stocks and bonds. Just as there are a number of bank
accounts for different purposes — checking, savings, money
market, certificates of deposit — there are a handful of
investment accounts to know about.

Some accounts offer tax advantages if you invest for a specific
purpose, like retirement. Keep in mind that you may be taxed or
penalized if you pull your money out early or for a reason not
considered qualified by the plan rules. Other accounts are
general purpose and should be used for goals unrelated to
retirement — that dream vacation home, the boat to go with it
or simply a vacation, period. Here's a list of some of the most
popular investing accounts.

If you're investing for retirement:

  * 401(k): You might already have a 401(k), which many
 employers offer and takes contributions from your paycheck.
 Many companies will match your contributions up to a limit
 — if yours does, you should contribute at least enough to
 earn that match before investing elsewhere.

  * Traditional or Roth IRA: If you're already contributing to
 a 401(k) or don't have one, you can open an individual
 retirement account. In a traditional IRA, your
 contributions are tax-deductible, but retirement
 distributions are taxed as ordinary income. A Roth IRA
 is a cousin of the traditional version, with the opposite
 tax treatment: Contributions are made after tax and do not
 offer upfront tax-deductibility, but the money grows
 tax-free and distributions in retirement are not taxed.
 There are also retirement accounts specifically
 designed for self-employed people.


If you're investing for another goal:
  * Taxable account: Sometimes called brokerage or
 nonqualified accounts, these are flexible investment
 accounts not earmarked for any specific purpose. Unlike
 retirement accounts, there are no rules on contribution
 amounts, and you can take money out at any time. These
 accounts don't have tax deductibility, but if you're saving
 for retirement and you've maxed out the above options, you
 can continue saving in a taxable account.
  * Custodial account: Also called UGMAs and UTMAs, these types
 of brokerage accounts can be used to transfer generational
 wealth. Custodial accounts allow an adult (such as a
 parent or guardian) to save and invest on behalf of a minor
 child. ABLE accounts are a specific type of custodial
 (529A) account that allows people with disabilities to save
 and invest tax-free without losing public benefits.
  * College savings accounts: Like retirement accounts, these
 offer tax perks for saving for college. A 529 account
 and a Coverdell education savings account are commonly used
 for college savings.

You can open many types of non-retirement accounts at an online
broker.

### 4. Open your account

Now that you know what kind of account you want, you must
choose an account provider. There are two primary options:
  * An online broker will allow you to self-manage your
 account, buying and selling a variety of investments,
 including stocks, bonds, funds and more complex
 instruments. An account at an online broker is a good
 choice for investors who want a large selection of
 investment options or who prefer to be hands-on with
 account management. Here's how to open a brokerage
 account.

  * A robo-advisor in a portfolio management company will
 use computers to do much of the work for you, building and
 managing a portfolio based on your risk tolerance and
 goals. You'll pay an annual management fee for the service,
 generally around 0.25% to 0.50%. Robo-advisors often use
 funds, so they're generally not a good choice if you're
 interested in individual stocks or bonds. But they can be
 ideal for investors who prefer to be hands-off.

Don't worry if you're just getting started. Often, you can open
an account with no initial deposit. (See our lineup of
best brokers for beginning investors.) Of course, you're only
investing once you add money to the account and buy
investments, something you'll want to do regularly for the best
results. You can set up automatic transfers from your checking
account to your investment account or even directly from your
paycheck if your employer allows that.
Customize your weekly reads
Tell us what's important to you and we'll curate a list of
articles that match your interests.

### 5. Choose investments that match your tolerance for risk

Figuring out how to invest money involves asking where you
should invest money. The answer will depend on your goals and
willingness to take on more risk in exchange for higher
potential investment rewards. Common investments include:
  * Stocks: Stocks are individual shares (pieces of ownership)
 of companies you believe will increase in value. Learn
 more about stocks.
  * Bonds: Bonds allow a company or government to borrow money
 to fund a project or refinance other debt. Bonds are
 considered fixed-income investments and typically make
 regular interest payments to investors. The principal is
 then returned on a set maturity date. Learn more about
 bonds.
  * Mutual funds: Investing your money in funds — like mutual
 funds, index funds or exchange-traded funds (ETFs)— allows
 you to purchase many stocks, bonds or other investments all
 at once. Mutual funds build instant diversification by
 pooling investor money and using it to buy a basket of
 investments that align with the fund's stated goal. Funds
 may be actively managed, with a professional manager
 selecting the investments used, or they may track an index.
 For example, an S&P 500 index fund will hold around
 500 of the largest companies in the United States.
 Learn more about mutual funds.
  * Real estate: Real estate is a way to diversify your
 investment portfolio outside of the traditional mix of
 stocks and bonds. It doesn't necessarily mean buying a home
 or becoming a landlord — you can invest in REITs,
 which are like mutual funds for real estate, or through
 online real estate investing platforms, which pool investor
 money.

If you have a high risk tolerance, a long time horizon and can
stomach volatility, you may want a portfolio that primarily
contains stocks or stock funds. If you have a low risk
tolerance, you may want a portfolio with more bonds since these
tend to be more stable and less volatile.

Your goals are important in shaping your portfolio, too. For
long-term goals, your portfolio can be more aggressive and take
more risks — potentially leading to higher returns — so you may
opt to own more stocks than bonds.

Whichever route you choose, the best way to reach your
long-term financial goals and minimize risk is to spread your
money across a range of asset classes. That’s called asset
diversification, and the proportion of dollars you put into
each asset class is called asset allocation. Then, within
each asset class, you’ll also want to diversify into multiple
investments.

Different asset classes — stocks, bonds, ETFs, mutual funds and
real estate — respond differently to the market. When one is
up, another can be down. So, deciding on the right mix will
help your portfolio weather changing markets on the journey
toward achieving your goals.

Building a diversified portfolio of individual stocks and bonds
takes time and expertise, so most investors benefit from fund
investing. Index funds and ETFs are typically low-cost and easy
to manage, as it may take only four or five funds to build
adequate diversification.

link: https://www.nerdwallet.com/article/investing/how-to-invest-money


