# How to pay off debt: Compare effective strategies and tips

## Key takeaways

* Review your budget to identify any expenses you can trim or
 eliminate, such as an unused subscription to a TV streaming
 platform.
* Consider boosting your income by picking up a side hustle
 if you have extra time and putting the extra money toward
 repaying your debt.
* If you need help coming up with a debt repayment plan
 during a recession, consider working with a certified
 credit counselor.

As inflation soars and interest rates climb, many
Americans are preparing for the possibility of a
recession. Despite low unemployment rates, many are
struggling under the pressure of the highest inflation the U.S.
has seen in half a century. Beyond all of that, the
majority of economists we surveyed said they expect us to enter
a recession by mid-2024.

If you have debt that you need to pay off and are struggling to
make ends meet under the current economic conditions, you may
wonder how to pay down your debt while staying financially
afloat. Paying off debt before a recession, especially variable
or high interest debt, is important. However, saving money
during economic uncertainty might be more important, especially
if you don’t have much of a safety net.

If you are unsure how to manage your debt during a recession,
the information below will help you decide what financial
decisions are right for you.

## How to manage debt during a recession

With a potential recession looming and many Americans
struggling to cover monthly expenses, it can be difficult to
decide whether to focus on building your savings or trying to
pay down high-interest debt before the economy gets more
unstable.

The answer depends on your current financial stability. If you
are financially secure and have emergency savings, you should
prioritize paying down high interest debt. This is especially
true if you have a loan or line of credit with variable
interest rates.

If you are struggling to make ends meet or don’t have a stable
income or an emergency fund, it is likely best to focus on
saving. You should still make the minimum payments on your
debts to avoid hurting your credit and accruing fees, but
establishing an emergency fund is ultimately more important
than paying down debt.

To help you prepare for whatever the economy brings, we have a
few tips.

## Evaluate your budget with a recession in mind

When the economic outlook seems favorable, many people live it
at the top of their budget. But the way things look now, we
should likely be tightening the purse strings.

Go through your budget category by category. If you have
anything you can part with now — like an excess streaming
service or a gym membership you rarely use — nix it.

Don’t stop there, though. Make a list of places where you could
scale back if needed. Are you shopping at the nicer grocery
store in your area? Have you been getting gas at the
convenient-but-more-expensive pump? Flag places where you could
make cuts if things get tough. Knowing you can adjust your
budget gives you two things: an action plan and the peace of
mind that comes with it.

## Look for additional work if possible

While unemployment rates continue to stay low, a looming
recession means companies will likely start making cuts. As
with your budget, look for ways to develop a plan B here.

That could mean starting a side hustle or picking up a few
shifts at a local retailer or restaurant. Sock away that extra
money to help pad out your savings or apply it to your payments
if you have high-interest debt.

Ideally, nothing will happen with your current employment. If
something does, having another income stream in place can help
you stretch your emergency fund further. And if a recession
does come in full force, competition for these extra gigs will
increase. Get a foot in the door now.

## Do whatever you can to make the minimum payment

Making your debt payments should be your top priority, right up
there with keeping yourself housed. If you don’t, your credit
score takes a hit. That means borrowing money in the future
will get more expensive.

First, don’t let yourself miss a payment because you simply
forgot. Set up a reminder system for yourself. That could mean
using the calendar on your phone or putting a sticky note
somewhere you know you’ll see it.

Secondly, prioritize the money you need to make those minimum
payments. If your bill isn’t due for another week, it can be
tempting to dip into that pot. Don’t. Missing your minimums
only adds to your debt, making your life much harder if a
recession hits full force.

If you really struggle with this, you might want to open up a
new account with your bank where you specifically store money
for your debt payments. Once that account is open, transfer
what you know you’ll need each time you get a paycheck.

## Paying down credit card debt before a recession

If you have credit card debt, you should prioritize paying it
down since credit cards come with higher interest rates than
most other types of debt. The current average credit card
interest rate is over 20 percent, and rates are even
higher for borrowers with low credit scores. Since credit cards
are variable-rate products, the interest rate on your credit
card debt is likely to continue rising if the Federal Reserve
raises interest rates again as expected.

It is worth talking to your credit lender and seeing if you can
negotiate a lower interest rate, especially if your credit
score has improved since you applied for your card. It is also
a good idea to write out how much you owe on each credit card
and the interest rate and monthly minimum payment for each
card. This can help you see the path toward paying off your
debt completely or at least making a higher monthly payment
than the minimum.

If you struggle to make the minimum payments and cannot
negotiate with your lender, it may be worth considering
debt consolidation or working with a debt relief
company.

## Paying down loan debt before a recession

Unlike credit cards, most personal and auto loans come with
fixed interest rates. This means borrowers who already have
these loans do not need to worry about their interest rates
rising during a recession. If you have a fixed-rate personal or
auto loan and can afford to make the monthly payments, you
should continue. However, if you struggle to make monthly
payments, it could be worth looking for a lower interest
product and transferring your debt.

If you have good to excellent credit, you could talk to a
financial advisor about transferring your loan debt to a 0
percent APR balance transfer credit card or a home equity line
of credit to get a lower interest rate. However, you should
only do this if you have good credit.

If you do not have good credit and are worried about being able
to pay off personal or auto loan debt, your best option is to
rework your budget and prioritize paying down your debt. This
is especially important if you have a secured loan so that you
don’t risk losing your car, home or other valuable assets.

## What if you can’t afford to pay off your debt?

If you, like many Americans, are struggling to manage your debt
and are worried about the additional financial strain a
recession might cause, you still have options. If you’re
finding it harder and harder to manage debt payments on top of
your other expenses, consider one of the following options.

### Debt consolidation

Debt consolidation allows you to combine several high
interest debts into one new loan, ideally with a lower interest
rate. This new loan is then used to pay off all your debts, and
you only have to make one monthly payment. Many debt
consolidation lenders offer to pay your creditors directly.

Debt consolidation is especially good if you have
variable-interest credit card debt and can qualify for a debt
consolidation loan with a fixed rate. You can also consolidate
debt by transferring your balance to a credit card with a 0
percent APR introductory period — assuming you can pay all or
most of that debt before that 0 percent period expires. You
should only consolidate your debt if you are confident you will
qualify for a lower interest rate than what you currently pay.

### Talk to your lender

If you are experiencing financial hardship, it is worth
reaching out to your lender to negotiate a temporary payment
pause or reduced interest rate. Some lenders may even provide
relief options during an economic downturn.

### Debt settlement

If you decide to work with a debt settlement company, you
will have to stop paying your creditors while the debt
settlement company negotiates with them on your behalf.
Ideally, your creditors will agree to a lower sum, and you will
establish a payment plan.

However, debt settlement is risky and should only be pursued as
a last resort. Your creditors do not have to work with a debt
settlement company and could sue you for defaulting on your
payments. Additionally, defaulting on your debt payments will
harm your credit score and your ability to borrow money in the
future.

### Credit counseling

If you are struggling with debt and need a professional opinion
about your situation, you should consider working with a
non-profit [264]credit counselor. Many reputable credit
counseling agencies will advise you for little to no cost. You
can also set up a debt management plan with these agencies
wherein you pay them monthly, and they pay lenders on your
behalf. This service simplifies the process for you but
requires an additional monthly fee.

## How to budget and save money in a recession

Creating and sticking to a budget is essential, but it is even
more important during a recession. Having one can help you free
up cash to put toward your debt.

Below are some steps to create one.
 1. Figure out your monthly expenses. Write down your fixed
 expenses, like your rent or mortgage payment, auto payment
 and internet bill. Then, jot down variable expenses, like
 your average grocery bill. You may have to comb through
 your billing statements or credit card bills to estimate
 how much you spend each month on variable expenses.
 2. Calculate your monthly income. Next, jot down your monthly
 salary, including what you get paid from any side jobs.
 3. Use a spreadsheet or budgeting app. Once you’ve written
 down your expenses and income, enter this data into a
 spreadsheet or budgeting app.
 4. Trim unnecessary expenses. Review your expenses to identify
 what “wants” you can eliminate or reduce. For example, if
 you have an unused monthly subscription to a streaming
 service, consider canceling it.
 5. Deposit a set amount in a high-yield savings account. To
 build an emergency fund, consider depositing a set amount
 of any discretionary income you have into a high-yield
 savings account. Doing this can help you avoid taking on
 debt in the future.

## Bottom line

Ultimately, the best things you can do to [265]financially
prepare for a recession are to establish an emergency fund, pay
down or consolidate high interest debt, and establish a
consistent budget.

If you are struggling to make monthly debt payments, consider
one of the alternatives outlined above. Above all, having an
emergency fund to cover your basic needs is the most important
thing. Without that safety net, you could get even further into
debt during times of financial hardship.

Link: https://www.bankrate.com/personal-finance/debt/how-to-pay-off-debt/#budget