# Popular Budgeting Strategies

You might be wondering how much you should spend within each of
your budget categories. Unfortunately, there is no right amount
to spend in any category for every individual. It's up to you
to decide what works for you. There are a variety of
philosophies about the best way to budget.

Below are only a few possible strategies. These are some
popular ones, but that does not mean they will work best for
you. We encourage you to try them out if you like them, but
remember that budgeting is an individualized process, so you
should be prepared to identify when a change needs to be made.

## The 50/20/30 Budget

In the 50/20/30 budget, 50% of your net income should go to
your needs, 20% should go to savings, and 30% should go to your
wants.

If you've read the Essentials of Budgeting, you're already
familiar with the idea of wants and needs. This budget
recommends a specific balance for your spending on wants and
needs. It also emphasizes the importance of setting money aside
for later.

## Pay Yourself First

In the “Pay Yourself First” method, the first “bill” you pay
every month is to your savings account. Transfer a
pre-determined amount into savings at the beginning of the
month. After you pay yourself, you should pay your bills, then
use the rest however you please.

This method could easily be used in combination with some
others listed on this page. However, this method can also be
used to keep track of a very simple budget, where you pay
for the things you have to, and don't worry about the rest.

## Zero-Based Budget

In a zero-based budget, every single dollar of your income is
assigned to a specific expense, leaving you with a balance of
$0. This method requires you to anticipate all of your upcoming
expenses so that you can allot your income to the appropriate
expenses.

Be sure to include saving into your plan as well; if you don't
plan to "spend" all of your income, you can assign what's left
to a "savings expense." This method ensures that you have a
plan for each dollar and won't make impulse purchases.

## Envelope Budget

In the envelope budget, you put specific amounts of your money
into envelopes (physically with cash, or electronically with an
app or spreadsheet) representing different budget categories.
Once you have exhausted the funds in an envelope, you can no
longer spend within that budget category until the next month.
If you have remaining funds at the end of the month, you have a
few options:
  * Roll over the remaining funds into the same envelope the
 next month
  * Transfer the remaining funds for a different envelope
  * Put the remaining funds into savings for a later date

Link: https://srfs.upenn.edu/financial-wellness/browse-topics/budgeting/popular-budgeting-strategies

