# Financial Planning: A Step-by-Step Guide

Financial planning involves making an assessment of your
current financial situation, and creating a plan for how to
reach long- and short-term goals.


The investing information provided on this page is for
educational purposes only. NerdWallet, Inc. does not offer
advisory or brokerage services, nor does it recommend or advise
investors to buy or sell particular stocks, securities or other
investments.

## What is a financial plan?

A financial plan is a comprehensive picture of your current
finances, your financial goals and any strategies you've set to
achieve those goals. Good financial planning should include
details about your cash flow, savings, debt, investments,
insurance and any other elements of your financial life.

## What is financial planning?

Financial planning is an ongoing process that looks at your
entire financial situation in order to create strategies for
achieving your short- and long-term goals. It can reduce your
stress about money, support your current needs and help you
build a nest egg for goals such as retirement.

Creating a financial plan is important because it allows you to
make the most of your assets and gives you the confidence to
weather any bumps along the way. You can make a financial plan
yourself or get help from a financial planning professional.
Online services like robo-advisors have also made getting
assistance with financial planning more affordable and
accessible than ever.

## 9 steps in financial planning

### 1. Set financial goals

A good financial plan is guided by your financial goals. If you
approach your financial planning from the standpoint of what
your money can do for you — whether that's buying a house or
helping you retire early — you'll make saving feel more
intentional.

Make your financial goals inspirational. Ask yourself: What do
I want my life to look like in five years? What about in 10 and
20 years? Do I want to own a car, or a house? Do I want to be
debt-free? Pay off my student loans? Are kids in the picture?
How do I imagine my life in retirement?

Having concrete goals can make it easier to identify and
complete the next steps, and provide a guiding light as you
work to make those aims a reality.


### 2. Track your money

Get a sense of your monthly cash flow — what’s coming in and
what’s going out. An accurate picture is key to creating a
financial plan and can reveal ways to direct more to savings or
debt pay-down. Seeing where your money goes can help you
develop immediate, medium-term and long-term plans.

For example, developing a budget is a typical immediate plan.
NerdWallet recommends the 50/30/20 budget principles: Put
50% of your take-home pay toward needs (housing, utilities,
transportation and other recurring payments), 30% toward wants
(dining out, clothing, entertainment) and 20% toward savings
and debt repayment. Reducing credit card or other high-interest
debt is a common medium-term plan, and planning for retirement
is a typical long-term plan.


### 3. Budget for emergencies

The bedrock of any financial plan is putting cash away for
emergency expenses. You can start small — $500 is enough to
cover small emergencies and repairs so that an unexpected bill
doesn’t run up credit card debt. Your next goal could be
$1,000, then one month’s basic living expenses, and so on.

Building credit is another way to shockproof your budget. Good
credit gives you options when you need them, like the ability
to get a decent rate on a car loan. It can also boost your
budget by getting you cheaper rates on insurance and letting
you skip utility deposits.

### 4. Tackle high-interest debt

A crucial step in any financial plan: Pay down high-interest
debt, such as credit card balances, payday loans, title loans
and rent-to-own payments. Interest rates on some of these may
be so high that you end up repaying two or three times what you
borrowed.

If you’re struggling with revolving debt, a debt consolidation
loan or debt management plan may help you wrap several expenses
into one monthly bill at a lower interest rate.

### 5. Plan for retirement

If you visit a financial advisor, they will be sure to
ask: Do you have an employer-sponsored retirement plan such as
a 401(k), and does your employer match any part of your
contribution? True, 401(k) contributions decrease your
take-home pay now, but it’s worth it to consider putting in
enough to get the full matching amount. That match is free
money.
  * If you have a 401(k), 403(b) or similar plan, financial
 advisors also generally suggest that you gradually expand
 your contributions toward the IRS limit. $23,000 in 2024
 ($30,500 for those age 50 or older)
  * Another savings vehicle for retirement planning is an
 IRA, or individual retirement arrangement. These
 tax-advantaged investment accounts can further build
 retirement savings. The contribution limit is $7,000 in
 2024 ($8,000 if age 50 or older).

### 6. Optimize your finances with tax planning

For many of us, taxes take center stage during filing season,
but careful tax planning means looking beyond the Form 1040 you
submit to the IRS each year.

For example, if you're netting a sizable refund each year, you
may be needlessly living on less throughout the year. Learning
how and when to review your W-4, the form you fill out
with employers, can help you to take control of your future.
Adjust your withholdings on your W-4, and you either can keep
more of your paycheck, or pay a smaller tax bill.

Getting cozy with the tax law also means looking into tax
credits and deductions ahead of time to understand which tax
breaks could make a difference when it comes time to file. The
government offers many incentives for taxpayers who have
children, invest in green home improvements or technologies, or
are even pursuing higher education.

### 7. Invest to build your future goals

Investing might sound like something for rich people or for
when you’re established in your career and family life. It’s
not. Investing can be as simple as putting money in a 401(k)
and as easy as opening a brokerage account (many have no
minimum to get started). Financial plans use a variety of tools
to invest for retirement, a house or college.
  

### 8. Grow your financial well-being

With each of these steps, you're protecting yourself from
financial setbacks. If you can afford it, decide whether you'd
like to do more, such as:
  * Increasing contributions to your retirement accounts.
  * Padding your emergency fund until you have three to six
 months of essential living expenses.
  * Using insurance to protect your financial stability, so a
 car crash or illness doesn’t derail you. Life insurance
 protects loved ones who depend on your income. Term life
 insurance, covering 10-year to 30-year periods, is a good
 fit for most people’s needs.

### 9. Estate planning: Protect your financial well-being

Financial planning also means looking out for your future
needs, as well as mapping things out for your loved ones.
Creating a will can help ensure your assets are
distributed according to your wishes. Other types of
estate-planning documents can also provide your relatives
with clarity on how you would like to be cared for, and who
should manage your affairs.

## Types of financial planning help

A financial plan isn’t a static document — it's a tool to track
your progress, and one you should adjust as your life evolves.
It's helpful to reevaluate your financial plan after major life
milestones, such as getting married, starting a new job, having
a child or losing a loved one.

If you're not the DIY type — or if you want professional help
managing some tasks and not others — you don't have to go it
alone. Consider what kind of help you need:

Complete financial plan and investment advice

Online financial planning services offer virtual access to
human advisors. A basic service would include automated
investment management (like you’d get from a robo-advisor),
plus the ability to consult with a team of financial advisors
when you have other financial questions. More comprehensive
providers basically mirror the level of service offered by
traditional financial planners: You're matched with a
dedicated human financial advisor who will manage your
investments, create a comprehensive financial plan for you, and
do regular check-ins to see if you're on track or need to
adjust your financial plan.

Specialized guidance and/or want to meet with an advisor face-to-face

If you have a complicated financial situation or need a
specialist in estate planning, tax planning or insurance, a
traditional financial advisor in your area may fit the bill. To
avoid conflicts of interest, consider fee-only financial
advisors who are fiduciaries (meaning they've signed an oath to
act in the client's best interest). Note that some traditional
financial advisors decline clients who don’t have enough to
invest; the definition of “enough” varies, but many advisors
require $250,000 or more. If you want to know more about how
much seeing an advisor will cost, read our guide to
financial advisor fees. 

Portfolio management only

Robo-advisors offer simplified, low-cost online investment
management. Computer algorithms build an investment portfolio
based on goals you set, and your answers to questions about
your risk tolerance. After that, the service monitors and
regularly rebalances your investment mix to ensure you stay on
track. Because it's all digital, it comes at a much lower cost
than hiring a human portfolio manager.

## Why is financial planning important?

Financial planning can help you feel more confident about
navigating bumps in the road — like, say, a recession or
historic inflation. According to Charles Schwab's 2023
Modern Wealth Survey, Americans who have a written financial
plan feel more in control of their finances compared with those
without a plan.

Once your basic needs and short-term goals have been addressed,
a financial plan can also help you tackle big-picture goals.
Thoughtful investing, for example, can help build
generational wealth, and careful estate planning can
ensure that wealth gets passed down to your loved ones.

link: https://www.nerdwallet.com/article/investing/what-is-a-financial-plan


