# A beginner’s guide to investing in the stock market

## How to start investing

On a high level, investing is the process of determining where
you want to go on your financial journey and matching those
goals to the right investments to help you get there. This
includes understanding your relationship with risk and managing
it over time.

Once you understand what you want, you just have to jump in.
You can decide to invest on your own or with the professional
guidance of a financial planner. Below we discuss in detail
each of the key steps to help you get started with investing.

### 1. Decide your investment goals

Before you decide to open an account and begin comparing your
investment options, you should first consider your overarching
goals. Are you looking to invest for the long term, or do you
want your portfolio to generate income? Knowing this will
narrow down the number of investment options available and
simplify the investing process.

“Consider what your ultimate goal is for this money—is it for
retirement, a down payment on a house in the next five years,
or something else?” says Lauren Niestradt, CFP, CFA, and
portfolio manager at Truepoint Wealth Counsel.

Understanding your goals and their timelines will help
determine the amount of risk you can afford to take and which
investing accounts should be prioritized.

For example, if your goal is to invest your money for
retirement, you’ll want to choose a tax-advantaged vehicle like
an individual retirement account (IRA) or a 401(k), if your
employer offers one. But you may not want to put all your money
earmarked for investing into a 401(k), because you can’t access
that money until you turn 59 ½, or you will get hit with
penalty fees (with a few exceptions).

You also don’t want to invest your emergency fund in a
brokerage account because it’s not easy to access money if you
need it quickly. Plus, if you need that cash when the market is
facing a downturn, you might end up losing money when you’re
forced to sell low.

### 2. Select investment vehicle(s)

After determining your goal(s), you need to decide which
investment vehicles—sometimes referred to as investing
accounts—to use. Keep in mind that multiple accounts can work
together to accomplish a single objective.

If you’re looking to take a more hands-on approach in building
your portfolio, a brokerage account is the place to start.
Brokerage accounts give you the ability to buy and sell
stocks, mutual funds, and ETFs. They offer a lot of
flexibility, as there’s no income limit or cap on how much you
can invest and no rules about when you can withdraw the funds.
The drawback is that you do not have the same tax advantages as
retirement accounts.

There are several financial firms that offer brokerage accounts
like Charles Schwab, Fidelity, Vanguard, and TD Ameritrade.
Working with a traditional brokerage usually comes with the
benefits of having more account types to choose from, such as
IRAs or custodial accounts for minors, and the option to speak
with someone on the phone and, in some cases, in person if you
have questions.

But there are disadvantages: Some traditional brokerages may be
a bit slower to incorporate new features or niche investment
options like cryptocurrencies. For example, fintech companies
like Robinhood and M1 Finance offered fractional shares to
investors years before traditional brokerages did.

Another brokerage account option is a robo-advisor, which
is best for those who have clear, straightforward investing
goals. The advantages of using robo-advisors include lower
fees compared to a human financial advisor and automatic
rebalancing to name a few.

If you have more complex financial goals and prefer more
customized investing options, a robo-advisor may not be the
best fit.

One important thing to note: Opening a brokerage account and
depositing money is not investing. It is a common mistake for
new investors to assume that opening the account and adding
money is enough, however the final step is to make a purchase.

### 3. Calculate how much money you want to invest

As you decide which investment accounts you want to open, you
should also consider the amount of money you’ll be investing in
each account type.

How much you put into each account will be determined by your
investment goal outlined in the first step—as well as the
amount of time you have until you plan to reach that goal. This
is known as the time horizon. There may also be limits on how
much you can invest in certain accounts.

Decide on a percentage of your income that you can dedicate to
building your portfolio. The general rule of thumb for
retirement goals is to invest 15% of your income each year, but
if you started investing later in your career or want to retire
early you may want to consider investing a higher percentage.
Keep in mind that 15% also accounts for any matches you receive
from your employer. This means that you could contribute 10% of
your W2 income with a 5% match from your employer to reach a
total of 15% to hit this benchmark.

If you live paycheck to paycheck, 15% might seem like a crazy
amount to invest. Don’t panic: It’s OK to start small, even
just 1%. The important thing is to get started so your money
will grow over time.

Plan how you’d like to invest your money. A common question
that arises is whether you should invest your money all at
once—or in equal amounts over time, more commonly known as
dollar cost averaging (DCA). Both options have their advantages
and disadvantages.

“For medium to long-term goals, dollar cost averaging is a
valuable strategy to ensure that you’re investing consistently
toward a goal and hopefully benefiting from purchases at both
higher and lower trading prices. As they say, it’s not about
timing the market, but time in the market,” says Tara Falcone,
CFA, CFP, founder and CEO of Reason, goal-based investing
app. Dollar cost averaging, even in small amounts, can be an
effective investing tactic.

But DCA has its downsides: Because historically the market
rises over time, you’re more likely to see a higher return if
you had invested a lump sum at the beginning.

“The data show that investing the sum all at one time is
better than dollar cost averaging. By investing the money all
at once, you get to your target allocation immediately and,
thus, have a higher expected return than if you kept a portion
in cash,” says Lauren M. Niestradt, CFP, CFA, and senior
portfolio manager at Truepoint Wealth Counsel. Your target
allocation refers to the mix of stocks and bonds you
should own based on your risk tolerance and how long you plan
to invest.

Because most people do not have large amounts of cash to put
into the market at one time, dollar cost averaging tends to be
the default option. And with investing, it’s better to jump in
and not waste time then it is to wait for the perfect moment
(when the market is just right, when all your financial ducks
are in a row, etc.) that will probably never come.

If you decide to invest with a lump sum, it is still beneficial
to continue adding to your investments regularly. Doing so
gives your portfolio more opportunities to continue to grow.

### 4. Measure your risk tolerance

Risk tolerance describes the level of risk an investor is
willing to take for the potential of a higher return. Your risk
tolerance is one of the most important factors that will affect
which assets you add to your portfolio.

“Before deciding on what level of portfolio risk an investor
wants to target, they first need to assess the comfort level
with risk, or volatility,” says Niestradt. “Does it make them
nervous to invest when they see the S&P 500 drop over 24% as it
has this year?” she adds. These questions are important because
certain assets tend to be more volatile than others.

One way to gauge your risk tolerance is to take a risk
tolerance questionnaire. These are typically a short set of
survey questions that will help you understand what your risk
tolerance is based on the responses you select. Someone with a
more conservative tolerance may have more of their portfolio in
bonds and cash compared to stocks; someone with a more
aggressive tolerance may have a higher portion of their
portfolio in stocks .

As you are evaluating your risk tolerance keep in mind that it
is different from risk capacity. Your risk tolerance measures
your willingness to accept risk for a higher return. It is
essentially an estimate of how you would react emotionally to
losses and volatility. Risk capacity, on the other hand, is
defined as the amount of risk you’re able to afford to take.

Risk capacity considers the factors that impact your financial
ability to take risks and would include things like job status,
caretaking duties, and how much time you have to reach that
goal. Because these other priorities can be capital intensive,
your ability to take on risk must fit within those
parameters.

### 5. Consider what kind of investor you want to be

There is no one-size-fits-all approach to investing. The type
of investor you want to be is directly tied to your risk
tolerance and capacity as some strategies may require a more
aggressive approach. It is also tied to your investing goals
and time horizon. There are two major categories that investors
fall into: short-term investing (also referred to as trading)
and long-term investing.

The lure of short-term investing is the potential to replace
your current income with revenue made through buying and
selling your investments. The drawback is it can be both
difficult and risky to see profits consistently because of how
quickly the market can move and how unexpected news and
announcements can impact an investment in the short term.

Additionally, short-term profits from investments are generally
taxed at a higher rate than long-term investments. The IRS
defines a short-term gain or loss if an asset was bought and
sold in one year or less. Long-term capital gains and losses
occur when the asset is held for more than one year.

Short-term investing strategies

There are two types of short-term investing strategies:

Day trading: An investment style that enters and exits an
investment between market hours. Day trading is notoriously
difficult, especially for new investors and over time has not
yielded positive results for the majority of those who have
tried.

Swing trading: Investors who take this approach are looking to
buy and sell an investment after a few days or months to
achieve a profit. The goal is to take advantage of significant
swings around seasonal events or trading patterns.

Long-term investing strategies

Long-term investing, on the other end of the spectrum, comes
with the upside of allowing more time for compounding interest
and more margin for error when the market experiences
volatility. One of the drawbacks of long-term investing is that
it can become more difficult to catch up with your goals if
you’ve delayed your investing efforts.

There are a few different long-term investment strategies to
consider. You don’t have to follow just one; it’s OK to try a
few different strategies.

Index investing: This method is perhaps the most popular among
long-term investors, in part, because firms like Vanguard
pioneered index funds in the 1970s, and it’s never really
fallen out of fashion. This strategy involves investing your
money in entire segments of the market, like the S&P
500. Investors with this style tend to take on less risk than
those who buy individual stocks, but often see higher returns
when compared to active investing strategies. Index funds tend
to charge low fees as well, so you’ll get even more out of your
investments.

Value investing: This strategy seeks to identify stocks that
are seen as undervalued by the stock market. Warren Buffett is
a big proponent of this investment philosophy.

ESG investing: ESG stands for environmental, social, and
governance. The Environmental category considers how a
company’s actions impact nature. The social category is a
measure of how employees are treated and the diversity
breakdown of those in leadership roles. The governance category
tracks how a company is running and what polices its advocates
for. Investors who choose this style of investing try to pick
stocks or funds that rank highly for their efforts to become
better corporate citizens.

Dividend investing: Dividend investors are those who buy
investments for the purpose of generating a regular income
stream. Dividends are regular (but not guaranteed) payments
that are shared with investors, usually on a quarterly basis.
Dividend investing in some cases can require significant
capital to generate a modest income.

### 6. Build your portfolio

Once you’ve determined your goals, assessed your willingness to
take risks, decided how much money you have to invest, and what
type of investor you want to be, it is finally time to build
out your portfolio. Building a portfolio is the process of
selecting a combination of assets that are best suited to help
you reach your goals.

“I recommend a goal-based investing approach because it allows
you to create separate portfolio ‘buckets’ for your investing
goals, each of which has a unique goal amount, time horizon,
and risk tolerance associated with it,” says Falcone.

This approach to building your portfolio allows you to view
your investments through the context of what you’re trying to
achieve, which can be a good motivator to keep going. Your
first step is to select the right type of account for the goal
you’re looking to accomplish.

“Decide what type of account [you] should invest in, whether it
should be a brokerage account, IRA, or Roth IRA. There are
limitations on how much you can put in an IRA or Roth IRA in a
given tax year, so you may need to open more than one type of
account,” says Niestradt. With the right account or buckets you
can then begin selecting your investments.

Below is a list of common investments to include in your
portfolio:
  * Stocks: This is an asset representing ownership in an
 individual company. If the company does well the value
 tends to rise, but the opposite is also true if the company
 falters.
  * Bonds: These are loans made to a company or government with
 the promise of repayment plus interest payments. Bonds can
 provide a steady stream of income but historically do not
 offer returns as high as the stock market.
  * Mutual funds: These assets are investments that are built
 to pool the collective funds of its shareholders to invest
 in a collection of stocks and/or bonds. Investors can own
 large swaths of the market with one fund versus attempting
 to buy them one-by-one. Mutual funds can either be actively
 or passively managed. Actively managed funds are run by a
 team of fund managers, while passively managed funds simply
 track an index like the S&P 500.
  * ETFs: Exchange traded funds are very similar to mutual
 funds and offer the same benefits but typically with lower
 fees and more opportunities for trading.

### 7. Monitor and rebalance your portfolio over time

Once you’ve selected your investments, you’ll want to monitor
and rebalance your portfolio a few times per year because the
original investments that you selected will shift because of
market fluctuations.

For example, if you decide to have 70% of your money in stocks
and 30% in bonds this could become 80% stocks to just 20% if
the stock market grows at a faster pace than bonds. This is
known as portfolio drift and if gone unchecked may result in
you taking on more risk that intended and could impact your
returns.

Rebalancing is the process of reallocating those funds to match
your targeted allocation. A general rule of thumb is to
rebalance any time your portfolio has drifted more than 5% from
its initial allocation. One advantage of robo-advisors is that
this rebalancing process is done for you automatically.

You’ll also want to tread carefully when looking at your
investments following a big drop in the market. This can lead
investors to make rash decisions and sell their assets when the
stock market has a bad week or month or year, potentially
losing money on their initial investment and missing out on the
opportunity to buy stocks when they are essentially at a
discount.

## Other key things to know about investing as a beginner

The process for investing does not need to be complex. A best
practice is to limit investment decisions rooted in
speculation, panic, or fear as these feelings can often lead to
significant losses and higher risk. The important thing for new
investors is to take things slow and strive for consistency.

“I would recommend looking for low-cost, broadly diversified
ETFs as the easiest way to get started in building their
portfolio,” says Niestradt. When in doubt, refer to your
investing goals as your North Star to keep your emotions and
your portfolio on track and remember that investing is a
process that happens over time and not overnight.

EDITORIAL DISCLOSURE: The advice, opinions, or rankings
contained in this article are solely those of the Fortune
Recommends™ editorial team. This content has not been reviewed
or endorsed by any of our affiliate partners or other third
parties.
  


