# 8 simple ways to save money

Saving is easier when you have a plan—follow these steps to
create one

Sometimes the hardest thing about saving money is just getting
started. This step-by-step guide can help you develop a simple
and realistic strategy, so that you can save for all your
short- and long-term goals.

## Record your expenses

The first step to start saving money is figuring out how much
you spend. Keep track of all your expenses—that means every
coffee, household item and cash tip as well as regular monthly
bills. Record your expenses however is easiest for you—a pencil
and paper, a simple spreadsheet or a free online spending
tracker or app. Once you have your data, organize the numbers
by categories, such as gas, groceries and mortgage, and total
each amount. Use your credit card and bank statements to make
sure you’ve included everything.

Bank of America clients can access the Spending & Budgeting
tool in Mobile and Online Banking to automatically categorize
transactions for easier budgeting.

## Include saving in your budget

Now that you know what you spend in a month, you can begin to 
create a budget. Your budget should show what your expenses
are relative to your income, so that you can plan your spending
and limit overspending. Be sure to factor in expenses that
occur regularly but not every month, such as car maintenance.
Include a savings category in your budget and aim to save an
amount that initially feels comfortable to you. Plan on
eventually increasing your savings by up to 15 to 20 percent of
your income.

## Find ways to cut spending

If you can’t save as much as you’d like, it might be time to
cut back on expenses. Identify nonessentials, such as
entertainment and dining out, that you can spend less on. Look
for ways to save on your fixed monthly expenses, such as your
car insurance or cell phone plan, as well. Other ideas for
trimming everyday expenses include:

Search for free activities

Use resources, such as community event listings, to find free
or low-cost entertainment.

Review recurring charges

Cancel subscriptions and memberships you don’t use—especially
if they renew automatically.

Examine the cost of eating out vs. cooking at home

Plan to eat most of your meals at home, and research local
restaurant deals for nights that you want to treat yourself.

Wait before you buy

When tempted by a nonessential purchase, wait a few days. You
may realize the item was something you wanted rather than
needed—and you can develop a plan to save for it.

## Set savings goals

One of the best ways to save money is to set a goal. Start
by thinking about what you might want to save for—both in the
short term (one to three years) and the long term (four or more
years). Then estimate how much money you’ll need and how long
it might take you to save it.

Common short-term goals: Emergency fund (three to nine months
of living expenses), vacation or down payment for a car

Common long-term goals: Down payment on a home or a remodeling
project, your child’s education or retirement

Quick tip

Set a small, achievable short-term goal for something that’s
fun and goes beyond your monthly budget, such as a new
smartphone or holiday gifts. Reaching smaller goals—and
enjoying the reward you’ve saved for—can give you a
psychological boost, making the payoff of saving more immediate
and reinforces the habit.

## Determine your financial priorities

After your expenses and income, your goals are likely to have
the biggest impact on how you allocate your savings. For
example, if you know you’re going to need to replace your car
in the near future, you could start putting away money for one
now. But be sure to remember long-term goals—it’s important
that planning for retirement doesn’t take a back seat to
shorter-term needs. Learning [86]how to prioritize your savings
goals can give you a clear idea of how to allocate your
savings.

## Pick the right tools

There are many savings and investment accounts suitable for
short- and long-term goals. And you don’t have to pick just
one. Look carefully at all the options and consider balance
minimums, fees, interest rates, risk and how soon you’ll need
the money so you can choose the mix that will help you best
save for your goals.

## Short-term goals

If you’ll need the money soon or need to be able to access it
quickly, consider using these FDIC-insured deposit accounts:
 * A savings account
 * A certificate of deposit (CD), which locks in your
money for a fixed period of time at a rate that is
typically higher than that of a savings account

## Long-term goals

If you’re saving for retirement or your child’s education,
consider:
 * FDIC-insured individual retirement accounts (IRAs) or 529
plans, which are tax-efficient savings accounts
 * Securities, such as stocks or mutual funds. These
investment products are available through investment
accounts with a broker-dealer

## Make saving automatic

Almost all banks offer automated transfers between your
checking and savings accounts. You can choose when, how much
and where to transfer money or even split your direct deposit
so that a portion of every paycheck goes directly into your
savings account. The advantage: You don’t have to think about
it, and you’re less likely to spend the money instead. Other
easy savings tools include credit card rewards and spare
change programs, which round up transactions to the nearest
dollar and transfer the difference into a savings or investment
account.

## Watch your savings grow

Review your budget and check your progress every month. That
will help you not only stick to your personal savings plan, but
also identify and fix problems quickly. Understanding how to
save money may even inspire you to find more ways to save and
hit your goals faster.

Link: https://bettermoneyhabits.bankofamerica.com/en/saving-budgeting/ways-to-save-money