# German money-saving tips

Germans have a reputation as thrifty people who would rather
put their money under their mattress than make risky
investments. Our tips can help you save some money – and will
make you feel right at home in Germany!

## 11 German money-saving tips for you

### 1. Use a bicycle

It’s good for the environment, your health and your wallet:
discover your neighbourhood, enjoy nature or get to work on
Germany’s growing network of bike paths.

### 2. Get the Deutschland-Ticket

Since May 2023, the Deutschland-Ticket offers access to
all German regional public transport across states and tariff
zones. For 49 euros a month, you can travel from Hamburg to
Munich and everywhere in between.

### 3. Buy groceries at the local market

Many cities and towns in Germany have weekly markets. Try
buying your groceries in the afternoon when vendors often
reduce their prices significantly.

### 4. Share your tools …

You need to hang up some pictures in your new flat? Why not use
the opportunity to introduce yourself to your neighbours! If
you are too shy in person, you can try platforms like
nebenan.de. Alternatively, many libraries now include
“Libraries of Things” where you can borrow almost anything –
from gardening equipment to musical instruments.

### 5. … and your food

If you want to save money and reduce food waste,
food-sharing platforms and apps are your friend. Check out
which one is the best for you.

### 6. Find clothes second-hand

Apart from popular online portals for buying second-hand
clothes, many German cities and towns have a good selection of
second-hand shops or even “Umsonstläden” (give-away shops). If
you want to buy new, try to do so out of season when many items
are on sale.

### 7. Visit flea markets

Flea markets are a great way to spend a lazy Sunday, meet new
people and hunt for unique and low-budget treasures.

### 8. Repair your appliances

The EU plans to introduce a “right to repair” legislation to
save resources, money and CO[2]. While this might still take a
while, you can repair many appliances yourself or find a local
Repair Café to get some help.

### 9. Enjoy the local lakes

Day trips or spending the day with your family at a public
swimming pool can get expensive fast. Luckily, Germany is full
of bathing lakes with good water quality and free beaches.
Careful, though: if you are not a good swimmer or prefer the
presence of lifeguards, you should pay the entrance fee to a
public bathing beach.

### 10. Find free culture

While most museums and cultural institutions in Germany cost
money, many offer free entry on special days throughout the
year, and cinemas often have reduced prices on certain
weekdays.

### 11. Save energy

We saved the big one for last: with rising energy prices, many
people are trying to be as budget-conscious as possible when it
comes to heating, water and electricity. Here are some useful
tips:
  * Do not overheat your rooms, particularly the bedroom, and
 don’t open your windows to regulate the room temperature.
  * Ventilate by opening all windows for a few minutes at once
 instead of leaving windows tilted.
  * Set the right temperature for your kitchen appliances and
 don’t keep the refrigerator door open for too long.
  * Regularly defrost your freezer.
  * Use the eco programs on your (fully loaded) dishwasher
 and washing machine and wash your clothes at the lowest
 possible temperature.
  * Let your laundry air-dry instead of using a tumble dryer;
 if you use a dryer, set a high spin cycle on the washing
 machine to make the laundry less wet.
  * Cook or fry with the lid on and use the residual heat of
 your electric cooker.
  * Only fill your kettle with as much water as you actually
 need.
  * Unplug your electrical appliances and chargers or use
 switchable power strips.
  * Use LED lamps and switch off the lights you don’t need.
  * Use the lowest possible water temperature for washing hands
 or taking a shower, and do not leave the tap running while
 brushing your teeth.

link: https://www.research-in-germany.org/en/plan-your-stay/finances/German-money-saving-tips.html

