# Budgeting for Beginners: Your Savvy Guide to Creating a Budget


Setting up a solid budget and staying on top of it is the key
to taking control of your finances. We know this task can feel
daunting. That’s why we’ve created a guide with easy to follow
steps you can take to start managing your cash flow, even if
you’re new to budgeting. The guide below is based on a recent
Budgeting Basics and Family Finances webinar led by our very
own Savvy Volunteer Valerie Malter. 

## What is a budget?

Let’s start from the basics. Budgeting is managing your
personal cash flow: understanding where your money is coming
from and where it’s going. As Savvy volunteer Valerie Malter
explains, “a budget is your personal profit and loss (P&L)
statement. You can think of your income as revenue and your
expenses as loss just like any business does.” And like any
healthy company, your yearly income minus your yearly expenses
and savings should equal zero, to make sure you’re not
overspending.

Annual Income – Annual Expenses = Cash Available for Savings
and Investing

Income – (Expenses + Savings) = 0

When setting up your budget, you must take into account not
only monthly expenses, but also yearly ones. Some expenses are
fixed and happen monthly, but some, like taxes or car and
homeowners insurance, are charged only once or twice a year.

## How to budget your money

### 1. Calculate Your Income

Get a clear picture of what your spendable income is. Include
all your sources of income you may have, such as:
  * Salary
  * Bonus
  * Commissions
  * Alimony/Child Support
  * Social Security
  * Interest/Dividends

Make sure to subtract taxes from your income to make sure
you’re only budgeting your disposable income, meaning the
amount you can actually spend or save.

### 2. Understand Your Spending

How are you spending your money monthly and yearly? List your
expenses and group them in broad categories. There are many
opinions on how much money from your budget you should allocate
to each one of these groups. The ranges below vary depending on
many factors like income level, place of residence, cost of
living, household composition, etc. But they can offer you a
general guideline to get started.

Approximate expenses distribution:

Housing  25-35%
Transportation 10-15%
Food  10-15%
Personal Spending 5-10%
Utilities5-10%
Insurance10-25%
Medical & Healthcare 5-10%
Saving, Investing & Debt Payment 10-20%
Total 100%


Once you’ve listed these broad categories, go into detail and
create subcategories. As you drill down, be as detailed and
thorough as possible and don’t leave any category out. See
examples below:
Category Examples of Subcategories
Housing  Mortgage payment

Property taxes

HOA dues

Home maintenance

Rent

Transportation Car payments

Tolls

Gas

Car maintenance

Public transportation


### 3. Allocate Income to Your Spending Categories

Now that you have a clear idea of what your expenses categories
are, it’s time to prioritize them and allocate a budget for
each one of them. Start by identifying those expenses that you
can’t live without or have no choice about, like rent,
groceries or health insurance. These are things you need but
have less control on.

Once you’ve allocated money for your needs, you can move on to
your wants, based on the available income. It’s essential to
reconcile your own personal situation and prioritize what is
really important for you. Make choices and be realistic in
terms of what you can afford.

This distinction can be made within each one of the spending
subcategories. Every one of these categories contains both non
discretionary expenses (those you need in order to live) and
discretionary expenses (those you want to have). It’s up to you
how to allocate your income for all discretionary expenses, how
often to make these purchases, or whether you should swap a
high cost discretionary expense for a lower cost one. Always
keep in mind: every decision has financial implications.

### Understand Fixed vs. Variable Expenses

Every budget has both fixed and variable expenses. Fixed
expenses are recurring expenses, which largely remain constant,
like rent, mortgage payments, school tuition, health insurance,
etc. They usually take up most of our budget, and it’s
essential to keep them as low as possible to allow flexibility
for variable costs–which are harder to control–and savings.

Variable expenses, on the other hand, fluctuate month over
month, and are often unpredictable. This type of expenses
includes those that happen every month, but vary in amounts,
like groceries, gas, and personal care expenses, as well as
those that happen sporadically throughout the year, such as a
vacation. This group also includes unpredictable, unanticipated
expenses, like an unexpected car repair, that can wreak havoc
in your budget unless you’ve left a little bit of wiggle room
for them.

### The 50/30/20 rule

Following the 50/30/20 rule can help you make sure you leave
room for savings in your budget:
  * Fixed costs that stay the same month after month, such as
 your rent or mortgage, car payment, and cable bill, should
 take up 50% of your income.
  * Variable costs that can change from month to month, such as
 entertainment, groceries, and clothing, should take up 30%
 of your income.
  * Savings should take up 20% of your income.

By setting a fixed amount to your variable costs, you are in a
way turning them into fixed costs and making sure they don’t
bump your total expenses over your income.

### 4. Set a Savings Goal

AKA, pay yourself first: you need to save some of your money
before you spend it. Every budget must include a plan for
saving and/or investing. In order to set your savings goal, you
need to decide what you’re saving for, and how much you need to
save for that. Saving for a rainy day fund is essential, to be
prepared for the unexpected. Think of other goals you want to
save for, like children’s education or a home down payment, and
allocate specific amounts for them.

There are many different ways to make sure saving and investing
is contemplated in your budget:
  * Contribute to your company’s 401K plan to the maximum. Most
 companies will only match your contribution if you
 contribute the maximum amount.
  * Set up an automatic savings plan to transfer a fixed
 percentage of your paycheck in a bank or brokerage account
 every pay period.
  * Save your entire bonus, if you receive one, and only spend
 money you earn from your salary.
  * Open a 529 plan to save for your children’s education.
 These types of savings accounts offer tax benefits when the
 funds are used for education purposes.

### 5. Track and Update Your Budget

What is the best tool to implement, track and update your
budget? The answer is simple: whichever works for you. Like
Valerie says: “Budgets are like diets: the best one is the one
you’ll stick with.” Below are different tools you can try:
  * Online Budgeting Apps: There are many online tools you can
 use to help manage your money. While these are very
 practical, especially if they integrate with your bank, all
 of these cost money and they offer little that you can’t do
 yourself on a spreadsheet. Some examples of budgeting apps
 to review are listed below. Make sure to review each of the
 monthly costs they charge and add that cost to your monthly
 budget spend.  Some options are:
 + YNAB (You Need a Budget)
 + Simplifi by Quicken
 + Mvelopes
 + Goodbudget
  * Budgeting Worksheet: You can very easily map and track
 spending using a spreadsheet.
The spreadsheet calculates total amounts automatically and is easily
 customizable. Instructions and a printable PDF version (in
 case you prefer to fill it by hand) are included as well.
 Be sure to try this method before you purchase any app
 membership!
  * Envelope System: In this cash-based approach, you can
 allocate funds for each spending category by placing actual
 cash in separate envelopes. This method helps avoiding
 overspending, however, it does require a lot of effort.

Whether you prefer the envelope system, a spreadsheet or a
budgeting app, just make sure to check in regularly with your
budget and keep it updated.

## Tips for Budgeting Beginners

  * What you don’t save, you can spend. When outlining your
 budget, always have this motto in mind: “what you don’t
 save, you can spend”, and never the other way around.
 Saving should be prioritized over spending: you should
 first establish how much you need to save in order to
 determine how much you have available to spend.
  * “Find practical ways to make necessary cuts. Small cuts to
 your budget can save you a tangible amount of money while
 not impacting your lifestyle too severely.” 
  * Use the same credit or debit card for all your expenses for
 a few months, suggests Valerie Malter. That way you can get
 an overview of your expenses by downloading a spreadsheet
 of your monthly credit card bill. Just make sure the card
 you choose has good cash back or points benefits.
  * “Just go one paycheck at a time. Create your budget and
 then focus on sticking to it for one pay period only.  If
 you accomplish this, then reward yourself on your next Pay
 Day with something that makes you feel really good,” says
 Jillian Beirne Davi.

Link: https://www.savvyladies.org/education/budgeting-for-beginners/?gad_source=1&gclid=CjwKCAjw1K-zBhBIEiwAWeCOF8drl2K190bS9LW3lQByPjf88YAUbuUPuUjmaqHnlBVMtURMl3a0_RoCB30QAvD_BwE


